[Music]
welcome to church history and theology a
study where we glean wisdom from those
who came before us come lay aside
today's concerns for a bit and join in a
study of the church throughout the ages
our forebears have shaped our faith in
countless ways let's go look into one of
those influences today on church history
and
[Music]
theology well good evening everyone
welcome to church history and theology
as we look into the subject of the
Apostle Paul the Apostle to the
Gentiles one of the fascinating things
about Paul as we get started here that I
just want to point out is that no single
figure has affected church history uh
outside of Christ more than
Paul he is responsible for nearly half
of the books of the New Testament uh
that are attributed to his name if not
more than half depending on how you hold
to who wrote the book of Hebrews and uh
his life is fascinating his conversion
his ministry his missionary Journeys his
writings
and all of these things come down to us
and it is remarkable to be able to look
into his life and to see exactly how
this took place now there are so many
resources on the Apostle Paul that I'm
not going to uh pull apart my reasoning
on everything here but I do want to give
as much of an overview of his life that
I can and what we can uh glean from it
again this is not a lesson on the book
of Acts or Galatians um or 2 Corinthians
where we get so many of these uh these
timelines uh laid out for us this is a
lesson on church history and at church
history and theology our main purpose is
to pull wisdom from those who came
before us and so when we look at Paul
there's plenty of wisdom that we can
pull from this and a great deal of uh
emphasis on his um on his endurance of
suffering on his faithfulness under
trial and just his tenacity to stick
with it no matter how difficult
everything got I find it fascinating
that as um as as I got to prepare all of
these uh lessons on the apostles and the
early deacons and things like this how
many of them simply are remembered for
their tenacity and faithfulness Under
Pressure that really becomes uh such a
clarifying moment for them whether it's
Steven at his martyrdom or Paul at his
uh you have this idea that uh the
Christian Life culminates in
faithfulness to the very end no matter
what the cost and uh Paul is certainly
no exception to that and um I wanted to
discuss his life usually everyone's
familiar with Paul from a very topical
point of view but I want to discuss his
life from a very chronological
perspective this is usually not talked
about in the church uh to that extent
but that's how I want to do it so uh and
again this is how I would have loved to
have learned about Paul in my early
years so here I uh I'm I'm teaching
myself 30 years
ago so let's go into it Paul his early
life as far as we can reconstruct Paul
was born around the year 5 ad uh making
him uh about maybe 10 years younger than
Jesus uh which would during Jesus's
Ministry Place him in his early to mid
20s
uh he was of Jewish Heritage he was born
a Roman citizen uh and set up his life
in Tarsus we know uh from later
descriptions uh that he makes of his own
life that his education was always set
in the school of Hell uh that he was a
Pharisee in his background it seems as
early as possible became a Pharisee
which would Place him as a Pharisee in
the mid 20s of his life so he's very
young he's starting off into this um his
training under uh gel in Jerusalem
started off when he was a teenager that
would Place him probably there about 13
years old uh had a tremendous Zeal for
the Jewish law um and as a Pharisee he
seems to have graduated into his mid-20s
uh as a Pharisee likely during the
ministry of Jesus so this kind of puts
us onto
a a a whole another overlay that when we
see Jesus interacting with the Pharisees
in Jerusalem and elsewhere that who was
called Saul at the time Saul Paul would
have been present in some of these
instances which is fascinating uh to
wonder if there was uh interaction
beforehand or not we do not know um but
uh we do know that he is still young
enough uh that in ad.
33 uh and I'm that's going to be the
last time I use ad hopefully that in the
year 33 he was still called a young man
which fits he would have been if he was
born in the year five then he would have
been about 28 years old um at the
stoning of Steven and that's actually
where he is introduced to us in the book
of Acts uh that is in Acts 8:
1-3 saying and and honestly it would
really be helpful for you to have your
um your scriptures with you because
there's going to be some uh some
importance to uh to some of what we're
talking about here uh found only in the
scriptures acts 8: 1-3 uh Saul approved
of his execution speaking of the
execution of Steven and there arose on
that day a great persecution against the
church in Jerusalem and they were all
scattered throughout the regions of
Judea and Samaria except the apostles
devout men buried Steven and made great
lamentation over them but Saul was
ravaging the church and entering house
after house he dragged off men and women
and committed them to prison
this is what uh Paul will later refer to
in Philippians 3 his Zeal uh for the law
uh as a persecutor of the church this is
the first place we run into him uh
imprisoning Christians Jewish Christians
these are his countrymen uh that hold to
the old testament's legitimacy and
Clarity the one thing they disagree with
the Jews about is that Jesus was the
Messiah God in human flesh uh the
Incarnate son uh the Son of God the son
of man all the other titles that Jesus
applies to himself that having come died
uh a substitutionary death on behalf of
his people now calls all men everywhere
to repentance Jew and Gentile alike um
and and at this early Point here the
proclamation had gone out from uh from
the uh the the very first days of the
church in Pentecost uh at the preaching
of Peter and the command has gone out to
the dispersed uh Israelites throughout
the world
the Jews disperse throughout the world
and then there is a reactionary against
this this grows well beyond just
Jerusalem and one of the fascinating
Parts is that persecution is used to do
this we talked about this in the episode
uh about Stephen and uh and Phillip
being that persecution was one of those
things that God used to spread the
church Beyond Jerusalem and here we see
Saul Paul at the very center of
that he actually Rec counts his life in
Acts 22 if you're not aware uh most of
the book of Acts is actually written as
kind of a pical um apologetic or a
defense uh regarding Paul's life and his
ministry and Acts chapter 22 is one of
those instances where where Paul is
speaking out uh this is of course well
after his conversion and everything else
uh but he is telling his story and so I
want you to hear that because uh that's
that's not something that's often
discussed that's acts 22 and I'm going
to read verses 1- 21 because he gives
the whole story there and it's better
than I could give it he says brothers
and fathers hear the defense that I now
make before you when they heard that he
was addressing them in the Hebrew
language they became even more quiet he
said I am a Jew born in Tarsus and cissa
but brought up in this city educated the
feet of
gel according to the strict manner of
the law of our fathers being zealous for
God and all of you are this day as all
of you are this day I persecuted this
way that's the early terminology for
Christians I persecuted this way to the
death binding and delivering to prison
both men and women as the high priest
and the whole Council of Elders can bear
me witness from them I received letters
to the brothers and I journeyed toward
Damascus to take ALS take those also who
were there and bring them in bonds to
Jerusalem to be
punished as I was on my way and Drew
near Damascus about noon a great light
from Heaven suddenly Shone around me and
I fell to the ground and heard a voice
saying to me Saul Saul why are you
persecuting me and I answered who are
you Lord he said to me I am Jesus of
Nazareth whom you are persecuting now
those who were with me saw the light but
did not understand the voice of the one
who was speaking to me and I said what
shall I do Lord and the Lord said to me
rise and go into Damascus and there you
will be told all that is appointed for
you to do and since I could not see but
because of the brightness of the light I
was led by The Hand by those who are
with me and I came into Damascus and one
ananas a devout man according to the law
well spoken of by all the Jews who lived
there came to me and standing by me said
to me brother Saul receive your
sight and at that very hour I received
my sight and saw him and he said the god
of our fathers appointed you to know his
will to see the righteous one and to
hear a voice from his mouth for you will
be a witness for him to everyone of what
you have seen and heard and now why do
you wait rise and be baptized and wash
away your sins calling on his
name when I had returned to Jerusalem
and was praying in the temple I fell
into a trance and saw him saying to me
make haste and get out of Jerusalem
quickly because they will not accept
your testimony about me and I said Lord
they themselves know that in one
synagogue after another I imprisoned and
beat those who believed in you and when
the blood of St your witness was being
shed I myself standing by and approving
and watching over the garments of those
who killed
him and he said to me go for I will send
you far away to the
Gentiles when we talk about the history
of Paul we have to construct it based on
many different timelines and
descriptions things that are hard to
reassemble um but the best that we can
assemble is what I'm going to give you
as far as for dates regarding his life
here um they are interpreted in the
conservative manner meaning that when a
book that is in the New Testament is
inspired and claims to be written by
Paul then I will believe that uh that is
uh that we presume uh here at church
history and theology that the scriptures
are authoritative and so when 1 and 2
Timothy and Titus are written by Paul in
their uh in their writing we will take
that to the bank and so for those things
um I want you to understand that the
timing of everything in Paul's life
assumes that the scriptures are true and
you can go ahead and assume that for the
rest of everything and every other uh
expression that comes out of this uh
comes out of this show uh and so with
that I want to try to reconstruct as
best as we can because there's some
difficulty uh as we'll talk about but
the conversion experience of
Paul seems to be in the year
33 which is even more fascinating
because whether or not Jesus's death
burial and Resurrection took place in
the year 33 uh it could have been the
year 30 or it could have been the year
33 Paul's conversion happens very early
very early on uh for one that was
already a Pharisee obviously he was in
Jerusalem um with with step and early on
it seems very early on uh we're talking
we're talking about somebody who would
have been a Pharisee and witness to uh
the the latter part at very minimum of
the ministry of Jesus Christ and uh
present in Jerusalem for all these
things now whether present at the
crucifixion or present at the trials of
Jesus we do not know um it would not
surprise me at all that he would have
been uh Center for that um or whether he
was absent from that he never alludes to
and never speaks to uh either to the
positive or to the negative so we just
do not know but we do know that his
conversion happens very early on very
early on and that is in Acts chapter 9
now I am not going to reread that whole
uh description uh but I will simply
point out that his uh his conversion
taking place in the year 33 uh with the
encounter of the Risen Christ
immediately Rockets him into the
position of apostle Rockets him into the
position of ministering to Those whom he
was previously hunting down uh it is
kind of a remarkable thing and then even
more ironic the Hebrew of HEB Hebrews
the bornn of the you know Tribe of
Benjamin the top of his game Pharisees
Zeal for the law becomes in his
weaknesses becomes the mouthpiece of the
Gospel to the
Gentiles this is going to
require a complete paradigm shift in who
he is from the very beginning uh his
clarity about his upbringing in Judaism
his Zeal for the law his deter nature
about uh about persecuting the church
and keeping pure the the line of Judaism
does not in any way cast out the law but
instead shows it is fulfilled in
Christ this is going to be something
that is a drastic shift in his life from
his conversion
forwards his initial preaching uh as he
even refers to it there took place in
Damascus where he was originally
planning on going and arrest in everyone
but then we have a fascinating little
change around that not a lot of people
know about and that is found in
Galatians chapter 1 ver1 17 I want to uh
read a couple of verses around it um so
this is Galatians 1:1 15-17 this is the
retreat into Arabia um during his time
in Damascus I want you to hear this uh
in Galatians 1:1 15-17 it says but when
he who had set me apart before I was
born and who called me by his grace was
pleased to reveal his son to me in order
that I might preach him among the
Gentiles I did not immediately consult
with anyone nor did I go up to Jerusalem
to those who are Apostles before me but
I went away into Arabia and returned
again to Damascus now this this period
of time is actually quite fascinating
because we have terminology elsewhere
that indicates to us that he spent
upwards of three years uh in Damascus
Arabia and then Damascus again uh which
is really quite fascinating uh to to
realize that we don't have hardly
anything about Paul's earliest Christian
walk except that he was taken
essentially to the deserts of Arabia or
to Arabia to something we do not fully
understand what's going on there um and
and taught by the Lord on some level
that we don't fully get now we pick up
his story again with his visit to
Jerusalem and that is where he first
comes to Jerusalem um as a Christian he
comes there the very next phrases in
Galatians chapter 1 spell this out um
here he says after 3 years I went up to
Jerusalem uh to visit sephus and
remained with him 15 days but I saw none
of the other Apostles except James the
Lord's brother now realize also we're
talking in the year
35 right his conversion takes place in
33 for 33 34 and 35 he spends it in
Damascus and Arabia and then Damascus
again then comes down to Jerusalem about
353 6 and he's meeting with Peter cus
and James the Lord's brother now for
James we're going to have an episode on
James soon because he's such a
fascinating figure uh that hardly ever
gets time uh dealt with him but James is
fascinating to me James has only been a
Christian for maximum these two or three
years same as Paul James was not a
Christian but before the resurrection of
Jesus Christ he was not a Christian
during the ministry of Jesus Christ but
we do find that Christ having made a
direct appearance to him which Paul
refers to in 1 Corinthians 15 that Jesus
after his resurrection appeared to his
brother James and James obviously became
a Christian and here we see him listed
among the apostles again we've discussed
before the term Apostles is used both
technically and non-technically in the
New Testament this is not the James as
in Peter James and John or um or you
know uh or the other James this
is James the Lord's brother a man who
also has only been a Christian for about
3 years at this point in the year 35 or
36 uh I just find that fascinating uh
anyway um Paul says in in what I'm
writing to you before God I do not lie
then I went down to the regions of Syria
and csia and I was still unknown to the
uh in person to the churches of Judea
that are in Christ uh they only were
hearing it said that he who used to
persecute us is now preaching the faith
he once tried to destroy and they
glorified God because of me so three
years later he's still introducing
himself he hadn't even met with the
other Apostles he just met with Peter
and James the Lord's brother uh which is
really really fascinating and that's his
early
Ministry after that we begin what I
think everyone is more familiar with in
fact there's entire classes on this in
seminaries and that is the missionary
journeys of Paul uh he takes three
missionary Journeys well three main ones
if you will there is a fourth one at the
end of his life but hardly anyone talks
about it because it's not found in the
book of Acts it's after the book of Acts
so there really are four missionary
Journeys and if you count the one to
Damascus and Arabia there are actually
five um but there's three main ones that
everyone refers to the first the second
and I'll give you a guess for the what
the last one is name is the third
missionary journey uh and these ones I
want to cover kind of in quick
succession but what I really want to
focus on is kind of the development of
the New Testament Canon while he's on
his missionary Journeys um and you'll
get to see this because uh I think
seeing when things are written in their
context is super helpful to be able to
understand what in the world's going on
at the time and really helps with uh
pulling apart why those were written uh
and how to interpret them well and those
kind of settings help us to understand
things so uh throughout the missionary
Journeys and where appropriate I have
sprinkled where he has written uh his uh
his different books of the New Testament
everything from Romans uh through uh
through the uh through through the uh
localized letters um U to to
individuals uh so let's go into this
here his first missionary journey um is
not even started off until after as he
says he ministers in and celissia uh
you're going to find here something
really quite fascinating that um after
the close of Galatians 1 he gives us
this quick little succession in
Galatians 2
1-10 uh he just started off in verse one
after 14 years I went up again to
Jerusalem with Barnabas one could argue
that his ministry in Syria and cicia of
many years um whatever the case may be
covered
yet another missionary journey of Paul's
now here his ministry in Syria and cissa
is not 14 years long uh his ministry in
Syrian Cici is about 8 years long but
there's there's other Testaments to um
from the year 36 he leaves from about 37
to 45 uh the year 37 to 45 and ministers
in Syria and cysia we don't have any
details about that we just know that he
did that and then he comes back to
Jerusalem and is commissioned out by the
church in Antioch after that in Acts 13
uh in the year 46 and then leaves on his
first missionary journey which is about
a year and a half
long um and that whole 14 years takes uh
takes up not only the ministry of the
first missionary journey but also the
the uh Ministry in Syria and celissia
and the year in Jerusalem before that it
seems and then uh yet another year so
there's there's all of this time
together leading up to these 14 years
and I wanted to uh kind of lead into all
of that so you can understand so get the
setting the year 36 he is in Jerusalem
he is meeting with Peter and James and
then he leaves for the regions of Syria
and csia these would be his hometowns
this is where he grew up um Tarsus was a
part of this Syria Antioch and all these
types of things um again you're
expanding out into an area that includes
a lot of Gentiles
um and his interactions with Gentile
Ministries from the very earliest part
here um and his ministry to that and
there is that is one of the things that
he even calls himself like Peter is the
Apostle to uh the circumcision and uh
and Paul is the uh Apostle to the
Gentiles it's um it's their their main
calling their main separation out right
well his first missionary journey
follows his ministry in Syria and cissa
his first missionary journey is in the
Years 46 to 48 again about a year and a
half long he was commissioned out by the
church in Antioch in Acts 13 1 through3
right acts 13 says this now there were
in the Church of Antioch prophets and
teachers Barnabas Simeon who was called
Niger Lucius of sirene Manan a lifelong
friend of Herod the tetrarch and Saul
while they were worshiping the Lord in
fasting the holy spirit said set apart
for me Barnabas and Saul for the work to
which I have called them then after f
fasting and praying they laid their
hands on them and sent them off now I
will simply point out this is not a
prerequisite for Paul to uh preach or do
ministry he has already been doing that
for 12 years uh but this is this is
something specific as far as his purpose
for a missionary uh Journey throughout
Asia Minor and Cyprus and that's what
follows to the next two chapters of the
book of Acts establishing churches
facing opposition wherever he went went
um this this kind of intention for Saul
and Barnabas to be sent out on this very
first missionary journey um as we know
it his first missionary journey but you
got to see it from the the church in
antioch's perspective they were sending
them out to
minister to all of the Gentile
World there is a work that the Holy
Spirit has for them a work that's going
to involve their suffering on levels
that perhaps people don't even realize
um there there's an indication as Paul
says that uh in every city that he would
come to the Holy Spirit would let him
know what he was going to have to suffer
inside that City and then says go and
preach in that city um and that by the
way at some points included stonings uh
to the point of death um and shipwreck
and all manner of things um pretty
terrifying stuff well the end of the 14
years comes that he refers to in
Galatians 2 and he finds himself with
Barnabas and Titus and uh himself back
back in Jerusalem this follows his first
missionary journey and this is in the
year
49 uh and where he attends the Council
of Jerusalem uh the Jerusalem Council
again uh really important for Barnabas
and Titus and Paul to attend but super
important for Peter to attend uh Peter
is the um the Apostle to the Gentile or
excuse me to the Jews and uh Paul the
Apostle to the Gentiles both of them
being present at the Jerusalem Council
is important important uh because
they're debating there over a gentile
circumcision in the law uh this is found
in Acts 15 by the way and references to
it in Galatians 2 um there are those who
think that Galatians is written before
the Jerusalem Council I highly disagree
uh Galatians 21 through1 uh clearly
spells out um the ramifications of the
Jerusalem Council and uh and especially
written to the area that uh is uh is
being conceed Ed at the Jerusalem
Council and that is the churches around
the area of galatia
um there
is uh agreement at the Jerusalem Council
again we'll spend a whole evening on the
Jerusalem Council was really fascinating
uh interplay of everything going on
there but just for sake of clarity here
there was agreement there on the
inclusion of Gentiles without the need
of circumcision uh circumcision was kind
of the initiating right of um of the uh
of of becoming a god-fearer as a gentile
if you were going to become Jewish you
needed to be circumcised if you were
going to follow the Jewish Messiah the
reasoning went you have to become
circumcised in order to become uh a
follower of the way but this is where
the early church gets led by the Holy
Spirit to understand
that the holy spirit is going to the
Gentiles not on the basis of them
becoming Jews but on them repenting and
believing on Christ
which means Christ is not just the
Messiah alone he is God Of Heaven and
Earth and uh Lord of lords and all Kings
um and so you have the Council of
Jerusalem working this out Paul himself
describes the ramifications of that um
where he says after 14 years I went up
again to Jerusalem with Barnabas taking
Titus along with me this is now this is
a debatable point but I'm going to teach
it the way I see it here and that is
that this is not a reference to him and
Barnabas and Titus going to Jerusalem uh
for delivering the um the money raised
in Gentile churches for the famine in
Jerusalem but that this is 14 years um
after the events that he described of
his
conversion
um yeah after uh after 14 years excuse
me of returning to Jerusalem after his
time in Arabia meaning that he's here
describing his trip to the Jerusalem
Council and it makes sense for what
comes after this watch he says after 14
years we're just going to read the first
10 verses here after 14 years this is
Galatians 2 1-10 after 14 years I went
up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas
taking Titus along with me I went up
because of a revelation and set before
them though privately before those who
seemed influential the gospel that I
Proclaim among the Gentiles in order to
make sure that I was not running or had
not run in vain but even Titus who was
with me was not forced to be circumcised
though he was a Greek yet because of
false Brothers sudad deloy uh false
Brothers secretly brought in who slipped
in to spy out our freedom that we have
in Christ Jesus so that they might bring
us into slavery to them we did not yield
in submission even for a moment so that
the truth of the Gospel might be
preserved for you and from those who
seem to be influential what they were
makes no difference to me God shows no
partiality those I say who seemed
influential added nothing to me on the
contrary when they saw that I had been
entrusted with the gospel to the
uncircumcised just as Peter had been
entrusted to the gospel to the
circumcised for he who worked through
Peter for his Apostolic Ministry to the
circumcised worked also through me for
mine to the Gentiles and when James and
sephus and John who seemed to be pillars
perceived the grace that was given to me
they gave the right hand of Fellowship
to Barnabas and me that we should go to
the Gentiles and they to the circumcised
only they asked us to remember the poor
the very thing that I was eager to
do this I think is an undeniable
reference to their presence at the
Jerusalem Council uh and it also fits
the exact terminology of 14 years after
his return from uh Arabia and Damascus
so following Galatians I don't think
there's any way to see this as anything
other than a reference to his U
participation in Jerusalem Council
either way we know he was at the
Jerusalem Council from the book of Acts
as well and so was Barnabas both of them
spelled out and dealing all with these
issues of circumcision and the
relationship of the Gospel to the
Gentiles that's everything that they
were dealing with in the year 49 uh so
that makes perfect sense and aligns
fairly accurately to that timeline after
this a real fascinating thing uh after
the Jerusalem Council Paul leaves for
Antioch and so does
Peter um Paul goes to Antioch first now
this is kind of Antioch you got to
understand is is a Central Hub of
missionary activities for the church is
the first place that Christians are
called Christians um but it is also one
of the closest places to Jerusalem where
we have a um a hub of transportation and
of trade and of kind of a
Cosmopolitan uh city that has all manner
of ships and Crossroads meeting there
Antioch is super important early on in
the church uh and and as it goes forward
it becomes one of the centers of the
church as well
um they're even rivaling Jerusalem uh at
some points in history here um Paul goes
to Antioch and Peter soon follows he
describes this meeting between them that
when Paul came to Antioch this is
Galatians 2
11-15 when Paul came to
Antioch um excuse me when Paul when
Peter came to Antioch Paul opposed him
to his face Paul says because he stood
condemned for be for before certain men
came from James he was eating with the
Gentiles was just fine but when people
came he drew back when Jews came to
Antioch he separated himself fearing the
circumcision party and the rest of the
Jews acted hypocritically along with him
so that even Barnabas was led astray by
their hypocrisy but when I saw that
their conduct was not in step with the
truth of the Gospel I said to Peter
before them all if you though a Jew live
like a gentile and not like a Jew how
can you force the Gentiles to live like
Jews it's it's a fascinating thing to
see that in Antioch Paul and Peter are
at loggerheads now Peter repents of this
quickly and uh returns back to preaching
the gospel as it should be it's kind of
one of these things that's hard to um
hard to imagine the difficulty it was
for the Jewish Church to understand
completely what in the world was going
on when it comes to Christ and the Holy
Spirit going straight to the Gentile
Church uh and created them a whole cloth
now Paul his entire Ministry is built on
this everything in Syria and cysia uh
everything that he has seen in Damascus
and in Asia the Council of Jerusalem and
now in Antioch as well um which is there
in Syria all of all of that Paul has
been acquainted with for 15 years but
Peter has spent much of his time uh in
in Jerusalem and uh and in places in
Antioch as well um and in Samaria and
things like this but dealing primarily
with Jews and and here the difficulty of
understanding how the expansion to the
Gentile World Is Still present in uh in
Peter's mind in the year
50 well at this
point Paul is sent out on a second
missionary
journey it is right at the beginning of
that that he writes the book of
Galatians um I would argue that he uh
writes the book of Galatians most likely
from Antioch right after the Jerusalem
camp Council uh and sends the book of
Galatians off which you know we've just
uh we've just read the story of um when
Peter came to Antioch so obviously the
writing of Galatians has to be after
that um it seems to be that the year
after the Jerusalem Council uh Paul
writes the book of Galatians which is
the first of his letters to be written
um and and sends that off and then
departs for his second missionary
journey throughout Asia Minor and
Greece this missionary jour Journey the
second missionary journey lasts 2 and
1/2 years from the years 50 to
52 he Journeys again through Asia Minor
Macedonia and Greece he does not go best
as we can say to the churches of galatia
but just writes a letter up to there now
what's even more fascinating if you if
you remember the timeline it does seem
that Peter departs and with his wife
continues on Ministry in Northern Asia
Minor in the churches around galatia uh
at this time as well so what what might
actually be fascinating uh to to to
think about is the effect that the book
of Galatians has on those uh those
churches on the Northern side of Asia
Minor at the same time that Peter and
his wife are traveling through them in
Ministry and writing first Peter
afterwards um to the same churches it's
really fascinating to kind of uh rebuild
that Al together anyway a good lesson
for somebody to to uh work on there uh
if you're curious about it uh he
Journeys through Asia Minor again he
comes to Greece Acts chapter 17 finds
him in Athens that's where the uh the uh
Appeal on the areopagus takes place his
um you know the altar to the unknown God
and the uh Declaration of uh kind of the
the aim of all of philosophy is found
its fulfillment in Jesus Christ and your
philosophers can only get so far um you
know they can understand that in God we
live and move and have our being but in
Christ Jesus we realize that um we not
only have our life and our being but we
have found conquering of death and
resurrection and all of these things he
announces in Athens some that hate it
some that like it it's uh really
fascinating section in Acts 17 to learn
about but that's that that's in the year
51 or or in the year 50 rather it's kind
of one of the earlier Parts there um for
most of this missionary journey by the
way uh now he has traveled he spends
like three weeks in thessalonica but he
spends a year and a half in
Corinth now Corinth is a fascinating
Church uh Corinth is a mess Corinth is
always a mess for some reason and um
even in founding the church in Corinth
um it takes him 18 months there in
Corinth just to just to help set it up
now Corinth makes
Antioch um look like uh practice when it
comes to uh an interplay of of you know
the metropolitan cities around this
would be as Cosmopolitan a city as there
is uh outside of the capital being Rome
uh Corinth is the crossroads of so many
things um and because of that there's
really bizarre things that go on in
Corinth and um there's there's a lot
more of the charismatic gifts that
happen in the Church of Corinth and then
there's also a lot more sin in the
Church of Corinth uh a lot more more
basic sins that should be really easy to
deal with but um Paul's Paul has this
this place in his heart for Corinth that
just gets broken over and over and over
again it just to even found the church
takes one and a half years um and he
spent so most of his second missionary
journey is spent in the city of Corinth
um previous to
this um because he's here in the year 51
and 52 previous to this Jews were
expelled from Rome uh we know this from
Roman history sutus tells us uh about
the expulsion of Jews by the emperor uh
over the issue of cresus which is a
misspelling of Christus uh meaning
Christ that there was there was uh and
that that that had occurred in the year
49 um this is referenced in Acts 18 uh
we have we have it expressed there uh
that the emperor Claudius did this you
can see it right at the beginning of
Acts chapter 18 after this Paul left
Athens it says and went to Corinth and
he found a Jew named Aquilla a native of
Pontius recently come from Italy with
his wife Priscilla because Claudius has
commanded all the Jews to leave
Rome uh now we know that this is
historically verifiable and it lines up
exactly with this timeline here we know
from ponus again this takes place in the
year 49 here we are about year and a
half to two years later and when Paul
comes to Corinth there is a lot of Jews
that are Corinth that had left Rome uh
and Aquilla and Priscilla a married
couple that are really interesting uh
couple um are there and uh they worked
together with them there're both of them
Paul and them tent makers and that
that's a fascinating thing about Paul um
he kind of pays his way wherever he goes
by making tents uh that's his kind of
his bivocational ministry there um and
that's that's his job and and here
Priscilla Aquilla help him out with that
they do the same thing uh again how did
the ministry in Corinth look for a year
and a half says he reasoned with them in
the synagogue every Sabbath tried to
persuade Jews and
Greeks um again when Silas and Timothy
arrived from Macedonia Paul was occupied
with the word this is all in Acts 18 uh
testifying to the Jews that uh that the
Christ was Jesus when they had opposed
and reviled him he took out his garments
and said to them your blood be on your
own heads I am innocent from now on I
will go to the Gentiles uh and he left
there and went to the house of a man
named titius justice a worshipper of God
his house was next door to the synagogue
uh Crispus the ruler of the synagogue
believed in the Lord together with his
entire household and many of the
Corinthians hearing Paul believed and
were baptized the Lord said to Paul One
Night in a vision do not be afraid go on
speaking and do not be silent for I'm
with you no one will attack you to harm
you for I have many in this city who are
my people and he stayed a year and six
months teaching the word of God among
them so again we see 18 months he spends
in Corinth and um and first you know uh
first time he runs into pillan Aquilla
here um while he is in Corinth he writes
to a previous church that he had been um
ministering to in in the upper parts of
Greece and that is uh the church in
thessalonica from Corinth he writes
first and 2 Thessalonians so um you have
now Galatians 1 and 2 Thessalonians um
um uh are written there during his
second missionary
journey well he returns back to
Jerusalem and it's a fascinating thing
uh to see how exactly these things take
place and what's more interesting is
that in his third missionary journey we
have a a more uh detailed account of
exactly what has happened uh while his
first missionary journey was only a year
and a half um his second missionary
journey was to and a half years his
third missionary journey is 5
years and this takes place if you're
keeping track between the years 53 and
57 it says in Acts 18- 21 and you can
see this whole um this whole expression
here uh that he was strengthening the
churches um you do not get a huge
stayover in Jerusalem by the way between
these two missionary Journeys basically
it takes place in the book of Acts at
the course of a single verse um he comes
back in Acts 18:22 and then he leaves in
Acts 23 or acts
18:23
um and this year is uh this or this
occurrence here is even more uh
interesting because these five years of
his third missionary journey three of
them are in Ephesus now Acts
19 explains his uh his initial stay in
emphasis um and he he uh he extends his
stay there for 3 years now he does make
a brief trip to Corinth now here's the
real the remarkable thing of this so
much of his missionary efforts are
wrapped up in the city of Corinth and
that that to me is fascinating because
when we when we try to spell out exactly
what's been occurring and what's been
going on um Corinth is like always
this this almost this this bur in the
saddle this real frustrating thing that
just keeps coming up and keeps coming
back because even here when he when he
continues through Asia Minor he spends
three years of this missionary journey
in Ephesus um in uh in Acts uh 18 and 19
here um and uh during which he writes
the book of First
Corinthians and then he makes a trip to
Corinth and then also writes the book
second Corinthians um constantly trying
to deal with the issues that are
occurring uh in the city of Corinth now
we also know that he wrote two other
letters before this to the church in
Corinth one of them between 1 and 2
Corinthians it it's it's so many things
trying to deal with this church in
Corinth um which we will learn here in a
second uh continued on um even after his
own death uh he even calls his brief
trip to Corinth the painful visit um in
in 2 Corinthians uh chapter 2 vers1
um and then uh yet another letter that
he wrote in the anguish of his heart the
tearful letter the painful letter um he
wrote three if not four letters to the
church in Corinth two of which were
scripture two of which were not um which
is why we only have two of them in the
scriptures um and you can read about
that in 2 Corinthians 2: 1-4 um for the
reference of him staying in um in
Ephesus for 3 years years you can see
that in Acts 20:31 if you're putting
together notes for your own uh study
here uh after this he travels to
Macedonia uh again he uh meets with
Titus there and writes 2 Corinthians uh
from there uh in the year 56 probably
late
56 I want you to see something though uh
about the church in Corinth because I I
referenced that uh the the issues in
Corinth did not go away after PA death
but continued on there is a a witness to
a lot of these things and that is a um
one of the elders in Rome named Clement
uh is writes a letter in the in the 90s
so this is about 30 maybe 40 years later
and you can see in that letter how many
of the issues still exist um in in the
uh in you know 40 years later that are
present during Paul's life that it never
actually went away Corinth was just a
center of problems um we're going to
spend a whole resource episode on first
Clement we'll read the whole thing um
but just to look at chapter 47 of first
Clement uh which is just the 47th um um
paragraph here he
says he encourages the church in Corinth
This is 40 years after uh the occurrence
that I'm dealing with right now he says
take up the Epistle of the Blessed
Apostle Paul what did he write to you at
the time when the first go when the
gospel was first being preached truly
under the inspiration of the spirit he
wrote to you concerning himself and Paul
and Apollos because even then parties
had been formed among you now there he
refers directly to 1 Corinthians chapter
3 but that inclination for one above
another entailed less guilt upon you and
as much as your partialities were then
shown towards Apostles already of high
reputation and towards a man whom they
had approved but now reflect who those
are that have perverted you and lessened
and the Renown of your far-famed
brotherly love it is disgraceful beloved
yay highly disgraceful and Unworthy of
your Christian profession that such a
thing should be heard of as the most
steadfast and ancient Church of the
Corinthians should on account of one or
two persons engage in sedition against
the presbyter the elders and this rumor
has reached not only us but those also
who are unconnected with us so that
through your infatuation the name of the
Lord is blasphemed while danger is also
brought upon yourselves um again Clement
is pointing out that basically the the
issues that were taking place in the
time of Paul were significant but the
church in Corinth has only made them
worse in the last uh 30 years that these
things have uh not increased but have
created factions and divisions and
separations and we're following this
leader and that leader well you don't
follow our leader so that's a problem
and well you should follow this leader
and and here Clement makes clear to him
again Clement is one of the elders uh of
the church in Rome is writing to the
church in Corinth you know 30 years
after the New Testament closes out uh
the ministry of Peter and Paul uh and
and basically saying that the church in
Corinth is worse now than than when it
was in the times of
Paul well let's come back to the year
5657 what goes on well Paul uh after
traveling through Macedonia um and
meeting with Titus there and writing the
book of second Corinthians actually goes
to Corinth again uh and he writes from
there The Book of Romans uh that's in
the year
57 from there he travels to Jerusalem
and you you remember when we were
talking about um the New Testament
prophets he lands in Jerusalem the
prophet agabus uh and the four prophetic
Daughters of Philip the Evangelist all
warn him about going to Jerusalem you're
going to be arrested that's exactly what
happens and that begins kind of the last
part of his life and that is his
imprisonment his later
Ministry um and uh his
martyrdom he is arrested in Jerusalem
that story is told towards the end of
the book of uh or the end of uh acts 21
uh he's arrested in Jerusalem in the
year
57 um he had already spent the winter
before in Corinth where he wrote the
book of Romans and then he goes to
Jerusalem he is arrested almost
immediately um he spends 2 years
uh in prison in uh cesaria just north of
Jerusalem that's the years 58 and 59 uh
there you have all the trials by Felix
and fesus and Agrippa these are acts
2425 26 uh and from there he voyages to
Rome and is Shipwrecked along the way
that's acts 27 that's the year
60 while he is in
Rome he is under house arrest he's able
to take visitors he's able to uh to have
people come to him he's able to write uh
he's able to have helpers and so forth
so house arrest here again he is uh as
was made very clear at his uh at his
arrest after Jerusalem when they were
going to flog him he is a Roman citizen
and so when he appeals to Caesar he has
to go to Caesar but you have to wait in
line uh to have your uh to have your uh
time before Caesar to be heard uh this
takes a couple of years and so while he
is awaiting that he is in house arrest
in Rome
and his ministry there uh is the close
of the book of Acts that's acts 28 all
the way to the end he's preaching the
gospel he's taking in visitors and all
this kind of stuff from there he writes
what's called his prison
Epistles uh that is the book of
Ephesians Philippians Colossians even
philimon which shows that even a runaway
slave on SMS was able to come and be of
help to him uh there when he was in
prison um again it would make sense that
onesimus runs away from phiman and finds
his way to the capital um you know be
able to find you know all roads lead to
Rome and so all roads lead away from
Rome as well you're able to find some
kind of um way to get along in the world
or some kind of um some kind of work
well he is released from house arrest
after the close of Acts I think this is
kind of the breaking down point that U
most people don't realize uh after he
writes Ephesians Philippians Colossians
and phiman he is set free from from uh
prison the the reason why a lot of
people don't know this is that he um
this happens after the close of the book
of Acts um around the year 62 or 63
depending on how you laid this out and
there are some indications that he might
have traveled to Spain that's I would
argue a little bit conjecture um it is
possible but unlikely but what does seem
to be quite clear is that he um he did
go to Mass onia at least and from there
writes first Timothy uh and then uh
writes to Titus as well from
nicopolis uh and then he's rearrested
when he goes back to Rome um why is he
rearrested in Rome well Rome had burned
and the persecution of Christians broke
out in Rome um Peter and his wife by the
way are in Rome at this point and
arrested as well um why all of that took
place why they were going back to Rome
we don't really fully understand or know
but what we do know is that it did occur
um and he is rearrested in Rome uh and
that's when he writes the book of second
Timothy second Timothy is written during
his last imprisonment um and um right
before he is martyred by beheading uh
during the persecution of Nero uh in
Rome probably the year 67 uh same time
as Peter and Peter's wife you can see
this kind of a very different
somber tone that takes place in second
Timothy uh in chap 4: 6-8 where he this
is the last thing that Paul writes uh
and he writes to Timothy again uh one of
the elders in the church in Ephesus um
as as Paul has called him before his his
beloved uh uh son in the
faith he describes this he says for I am
already being poured out as a drink
offering and the time of my departure
has come come I have fought the good
fight I have finished the race I have
kept the faith henceforth there is laid
up for me the crown of righteousness
which the Lord the righteous judge will
award to me on that day and not only to
me but also to all who have loved his
appearing it's interesting
um it's interesting to pull wisdom from
how he interacts with the impending
martyrdom uh he writes to Timothy who is
uh a young Christian a leader in the
church in
Ephesus and he writes to him about this
hope that he has in the face of this
that there is a crown of righteousness
that there's nothing that he has done
but it is the Lord the righteous judge
who is awarding this to him uh and
because he has loved his appearing this
is this is his faith has been kept the
endurance has held fast and now he is
waiting for his time of
departure well Clement uh to return to
him again first
Clement re refers to this because here's
the thing there are still people in
Clement's day who would be Witnesses uh
if Clement not himself a witness to um
Paul's imprisonment and martyrdom 30
years later not even 30 years later
about you know maybe 25 to 28 years
later uh writes
this uh after talking about the examples
of faith in in Times Gone by in in
chapter 4 in chapter 5 five he says not
to dwell upon ancient examples let us
come to the most recent spiritual Heroes
let us take the noble examples furnished
in our own generation through envy and
jealousy the greatest and most righteous
pillars of the church have been
persecuted and put to death let us set
before our eyes the illustrious Apostles
Peter through unrighteous Envy endured
not one but two uh not one or two but
numerous labors when he had finally
suffered martyrdom departed to the place
of Glory due to him
owing to Envy Paul also obtained the
reward of patient endurance after being
seven times thrown into captivity
compelled to flee and stoned after
preaching both in the East and the West
he gained the illustrious reputation due
to his faith having taught righteousness
to the whole world and come to the
extreme limit of the West there may be
one of the references to him going to
Spain and suffered martyrdom under the
prefects thus was he removed from the
world and went into the holy Place
having proved himself a striking example
of
patience Clement if not an eyewitness uh
he is uh a pastor to eyewitnesses of
what had occurred with Paul and Peter
and so his testimony here is really
solid stuff um uh because he's one of
the elders in the same city in which it
took
place Paul is a remarkable figure not
only only because of his life but what
he contributes to in his legacy and the
wisdom that God had afforded to him to
write not only in words of wisdom but
just in a compelling of the significance
of these things Paul
contributes so many of the aspects of
the Christian faith to its Clarity a
justification by the uh by the grace of
God through faith uh you find this in
the Book of Romans the book of Galatians
you know kind of sandwich on all sides
of his ministry the relationship of the
law to Grace uh the body of Christ and
the church the depictions of marriage
and the interplay of suffering Theology
and its application eschatology the
kingdom of God there's there's very few
doctrines of the church that Paul did
not play a pivotal role in early on his
familiarity and Clarity with regards to
the use and the uh misuse of the Old
Testament the old as having been
fulfilled in the law of Christ um are
are absolutely necessary to understand
the Christian faith uh it is a
remarkable thing that Paul himself uh
wrote nearly half of the letters of the
New Testament you can see why that is he
is sent throughout the world um to
encourage and to evangelize not Jews
throughout the world but Gentiles
throughout the world um as the Apostle
of the Gentiles that was his main
purpose and as a gentile myself I am
eternally grateful to Paul and his
ministry and I um I get to study him
often and preach on his writings a lot
and uh it's still to this day one of my
favorite things to do uh grateful for
Paul he is a a remarkable figure and one
that I hope you understand a little bit
more uh and appreciate a lot more uh as
the days go on until next time may God
bless you all well
[Music]
[Applause]